README.MD, before:

# What?

A simple sprite sheet generator for the command line on Windows and Linux.

SSSprites takes a directory of PNGs / JPGs / BMPs / TGAs and puts them into a sprite sheet. Files with other extensions are ignored. The same image formats are supported for output.

Example:
```
C:\>sssprites C:\images\hero_animation -out:C:\project\game\assets\sprites\hero_animation.png

REM use the working directory as the source for images if no directory is given
C:\images\hero_animation>sssprites -out:C:\project\game\assets\sprites\hero_animation.png
```

# Why?

Surprisingly there seem to be very few usable sprite sheet generators for the command line, so I wrote this one. I guess nowadays big engines have their own tools for this and you could also make them manually or with relatively bad plugins for image editors, but I wanted something that could be easily integrated with the build script of my game projects, so here we are.

# Limitations

## Currently the output image size guessed and can't be specified
Based on the first image in the user specified directory the image size and number of channels of all other images is assumed to be the same. The processing will fail if this assumption is incorrect. Also, the layout is currently determined by using the image size and the number of images to make a best guess of how many rows and colums are needed to create a resulting image that is as close to a square as possible. This doesn't work super great yet. Support for manually specifying rows and columns is planned. Manually specifying a resolution seems unnecessary and inconvenient to me currently.

Examples:
 - 4 files, first image: 128x128px, 3ch -> output image: 256x256pixels, 3 ch
 - 9 files, first image: 128x128px, 3ch -> output image: 384x384pixels, 3 ch
 - 5 files, first image: 128x128px, 3ch -> output image: 384x384pixels, 3 ch

## No way to manually specify the order of the images

The OS must provide the images in the right order, which usually means that the files must be named for alphabetical sorting.

## All input images must be the same size, same number of channels, etc.

... otherwise an error will occur. This means either all images have an alpha channel or none of them do!

# Dependencies

 - [Odin](https://odin-lang.org)'s standard library
 - [stb_image](https://github.com/nothings/stb) which is included in Odin's vendor libraries, so this should hopefully be fairly stable through future versions of Odin

# Building

SSSprites is written in [Odin](https://odin-lang.org), so you'll have to install the compiler and its dependencies. Make sure you have at least version dev-2024-07.

Open a terminal and go to the root of the project, then type:

```
odin build sssprites -o:speed
```

Done. Now you should have the compiled binary named "sssprites.exe" in the root of your project.

# Alternatives

## Command Line

 - https://imagemagick.org see https://imagemagick.org/Usage/montage/ specifically. Just found out now, otherwise I would not have written this one. Oh well.

I didn't find any others that aren't super old and unsuited to my very simple use case, which is why I wrote my own. If you know other good CLI alternatives, please let me know, PRs with links are welcome!

## Desktop

 - https://1-enot.itch.io/gap Generic Atlas Packer (Win/Linux), which is certainly the best option I've found so far. It might even get CLI support in the future (as of now, mid August 2024, there is no CLI support yet).


## Web Based

 - https://kuut.xyz/spritesheet/
 - https://www.finalparsec.com/tools/sprite_sheet_maker
 - https://spritesheet.org

Commit message:

add alternative app CRAM to readme

README.MD, after:

# What?

A simple sprite sheet generator for the command line on Windows and Linux.

SSSprites takes a directory of PNGs / JPGs / BMPs / TGAs and puts them into a sprite sheet. Files with other extensions are ignored. The same image formats are supported for output.

Example:
```
C:\>sssprites C:\images\hero_animation -out:C:\project\game\assets\sprites\hero_animation.png

REM use the working directory as the source for images if no directory is given
C:\images\hero_animation>sssprites -out:C:\project\game\assets\sprites\hero_animation.png
```

# Why?

Surprisingly there seem to be very few usable sprite sheet generators for the command line, so I wrote this one. I guess nowadays big engines have their own tools for this and you could also make them manually or with relatively bad plugins for image editors, but I wanted something that could be easily integrated with the build script of my game projects, so here we are.

# Limitations

## Currently the output image size guessed and can't be specified
Based on the first image in the user specified directory the image size and number of channels of all other images is assumed to be the same. The processing will fail if this assumption is incorrect. Also, the layout is currently determined by using the image size and the number of images to make a best guess of how many rows and colums are needed to create a resulting image that is as close to a square as possible. This doesn't work super great yet. Support for manually specifying rows and columns is planned. Manually specifying a resolution seems unnecessary and inconvenient to me currently.

Examples:
 - 4 files, first image: 128x128px, 3ch -> output image: 256x256pixels, 3 ch
 - 9 files, first image: 128x128px, 3ch -> output image: 384x384pixels, 3 ch
 - 5 files, first image: 128x128px, 3ch -> output image: 384x384pixels, 3 ch

## No way to manually specify the order of the images

The OS must provide the images in the right order, which usually means that the files must be named for alphabetical sorting.

## All input images must be the same size, same number of channels, etc.

... otherwise an error will occur. This means either all images have an alpha channel or none of them do!

# Dependencies

 - [Odin](https://odin-lang.org)'s standard library
 - [stb_image](https://github.com/nothings/stb) which is included in Odin's vendor libraries, so this should hopefully be fairly stable through future versions of Odin

# Building

SSSprites is written in [Odin](https://odin-lang.org), so you'll have to install the compiler and its dependencies. Make sure you have at least version dev-2024-07.

Open a terminal and go to the root of the project, then type:

```
odin build sssprites -o:speed
```

Done. Now you should have the compiled binary named "sssprites.exe" in the root of your project.

# Alternatives

## Command Line

<del>I didn't find any alternatives that aren't super old and unsuited to my very simple use case, which is why I wrote my own. If you know other good CLI alternatives, please let me know, PRs with links are welcome!</del>

The alternatives here are simply way more complete and general purpose than SSSprites. I would have used them if I had found them earlier.

 - https://gitea.moonside.games/MoonsideGames/Cram.git This is probably the best alternative.
 - https://imagemagick.org see https://imagemagick.org/Usage/montage/ specifically.


## Desktop

 - https://1-enot.itch.io/gap Generic Atlas Packer (Win/Linux), which is certainly the best option I've found so far. It might even get CLI support in the future (as of now, mid August 2024, there is no CLI support yet).


## Web Based

 - https://kuut.xyz/spritesheet/
 - https://www.finalparsec.com/tools/sprite_sheet_maker
 - https://spritesheet.org
